---
layout: default
title: Day 3
nav_order: 2.5
parent: Course Content
---

## Generators

A group is *finitely generated* if there is a finite set $A$ which generates it. 
- finite groups are finitely generated
- $\Z$ is finitely generated
- $\Q$ is *not* finitely generated. 

## Special subgroups

If $H$ is normal in $G$ and $G$ is normal in $K$, is $H$ normal in $K$?

If $H$ is normal in $G$, and $f:G\to K$ is a homomorphism, is $f(H)$ normal in $K$?

Let $G$ be the dihedral group $D_{2n}$ of symmetries of a regular $n$-gon.
- Show that the subgroup of rotations is normal.
- Let $H$ be the subgroup generated by a reflection.  What is $N_{G}(H)$? What is $C_{G}(H)$?
- What is the center of $G$?
- Draw the lattice of subgroups of $D_{2n}$.

Let $Q$ be the quaternion group with $8$ elements. Draw its lattice of subgroups.
(The quaternion group has 8 elements $\lbrace \pm 1, \pm i, \pm j, \pm k\rbrace$ where each 
of $i,j,k$ satisfy $x^2=-1$ and $ijk=-1$.  Compare $Q$ with $D_{8}$.

Show that $Q$ is isomorphic to the subgroup of $\mathrm{SL}_{2}(\Zn{3})$ generated
by the matrices $\begin{pmatrix} 1 & 1\cr  1& -1\end{pmatrix}$ and $\begin{pmatrix} 0 & -1 \cr 1 & 0\end{pmatrix}$.

Show that the center of $S_{n}$ is trivial if $n\ge 3$.

What is the normalizer of the rotation group in  $\GL_{2}(\R)$? What is its centralizer?
Interpret this in terms of group actions.



The affine group $\mathrm{Aff}(\R^{2})$ of the plane is the subgroup of $\GL_{3}(\R)$ consisting of matrices of the form
$$
\left(
\begin{matrix}
a & b & x \cr
c & d & y \cr
0 & 0 & 1\cr
\end{matrix}\right).
$$
It acts on points $(u,v)$ viewed as column vectors 
$$
\left[\begin{matrix}
u \cr
v \cr 
1\cr
\end{matrix}\right]
$$
by matrix multiplication.

Show that $\GL_{2}(\R)$ viewed as the upper triangular block is a normal subgroup of the affine group.

The additive group $\R^{2}$ is a subgroup of the affine group; what is its normalizer?

The subgroup of the affine group where the upper triangular matrix is a rotation matrix (an "orthogonal matrix")
is called the Euclidean group.  


### Every group is a permutation group 

**Theorem (Cauchy):** Any group is a subgroup of a permutation group.

**Proof:** Given $g\in G$, let $f_{g}:G\to G$ be the map $f_{g}(h)=gh$.  This gives a map from 
$G$ to $S(G)$. We have $f_{e}(h)=eh=h$ so $f_{e}$ is the identity map.   Also

$$f_{ab}(h)=abh=(f_{a}\circ f_{b})(h)$$

for any $h\in G$.  Since composition
of functions is the group operation in $S(G)$, the map $g\mapsto f_{g}$ is a homomorphism from $G\to S(G)$.

Finally, the map $f_{h}$ is the identity map only when $h=e$.  So this map is injective.  

Make this explicit for the Dihedral group.






