---
layout: default
title: Day 12
nav_order: 6.8
parent: Course Content
---

# Ring homomorphisms

## Some example computations with ideals and quotient rings

- ideals of $\Z$ and quotients
- ideals $(x^2+1)R$ of $R=\Q[x]$, $R=\R[x]$, and $R=\C[x]$ 
- Ring of functions $X\to A$ and the evaluation map at points of $X$.
- Evaluation map on polynomials $R[x]\to S$ extending $R\to S$ given by evaluation at $s\in S$.
- $\Zn{p}[x]/(f(x))$
- $\Z[i]/2$, $\Z[i]/3$, $\Z[i]/5$
- two sided ideals of $M_{n}(R)$ 
- examples of left ideals of $M_{n}(R)$.

## Isomorphism theorems

1. $R$ a ring, $A$ a subring, and $B$ and ideal of $R$.  Let $A+B=\lbrace a+b | a\in A, b\in B\rbrace.$
Then $A\cap B$ is an ideal of $A$ and $(A+B)/B\isom A/(A\cap B)$.
2. If $I$ and $J$ are ideals of $R$ and $I\subset J$, then $J/I$ is an ideal of $R/I$ and $(R/I)/(J/I)\isom R/J$.
3. Let $I\subset R$ be an ideal.  There is a bijective correspondence $A\to A/I$ between subrings
of $R$ containing $I$ and subrings of $R/I$.   This correspondence respects ideals, so $A/I$ is an ideal
of $R/I$ if and only if $A$ is an ideal of $R$. 

## Sums and products of ideals

1. The sum $I+J$ of two ideals is the collection of sums of elements of $I$ and $J$; it is an ideal.
2. The product $IJ$ is the subring generated by products $ab$ with $a\in I$ and $b\in J$; it is an ideal.
3. $I^{n}$ is the product of $I$ with itself $n$ times. it is an ideal.

## Prime and maximal ideals

Suppose that $R$ has an identity element $1$ (and that $1$ is not zero, so the ring is not trivial).

- An ideal $I=R$ if and only if $I$ contains a unit. 
- $R$ is a field iff its only ideals are zero and $R$. 
- Any homomorphism from a field $F$ to another ring $R$ is either zero or injective.

## Maximal ideals and Zorn's lemma

**Definition:** A *partial order* on a set $A$ is a relation $\le$ on $A$ such that is reflexive (so $a\le a$ for all $a\in A$), antisymmetric (so $a\le b$ and $b\le a$ implies $a=b$) and transitive (so $a\le b$ and $b\le c$ implies $a\le c$).

**Definition:** A *total order* on $A$ is a partial order with the additional property that, given $a,b\in A$,
either $a\le b$ or $b\le a$. 


**Definition:** A *chain* in $A$ is a subset of $A$ which is totally ordered by $\le$. 

**Definition:** An upper bound for a subset $B$ of a partially ordered set $A$ is an element $a\in A$ such that, for all $b\in B$, $b\le a$. 

**Definition:** A maximal element of a partially ordered set $A$ is an element $m\in A$ such that $m\le x\implies m=x$
for all $x\in A$.

Examples:

- integers under divisiblity are partially ordered; powers of a prime $p$ are chains. 
- subsets of a set $X$ under inclusion are partially ordered; a chain is a nested sequence of sets. The union
    of elements in a chain is an upper bound for the chain.  The whole set $X$ is a maximal element. 
- Let $A$ be the set of pairs $(X,f)$ where $X\subset \R$ is open and $f:X\to \R$ is continuous (or differentiable, ...). The relation $(X,f)\le (Y,g)$ if $X\subset Y$ and $g$ restricted to $X$ is $f$. 

**Zorn's Lemma:** If $A$ is a *nonempty* partially ordered set in which *every chain has an upper bound* then
$A$ has a maximal element.

Not a lemma -- really an axiom.

If $R$ is a  ring with unity, let $J$ be a proper ideal of $R$ and let $A$ be the set of proper ideals
of $R$ containing $J$.  Then $A$ satisfies the conditions of Zorn's lemma -- a chain is an increasing
system of proper ideals; the union of proper ideals
is a proper ideal (if the union weren't proper, it would contain $1$, so $1$ would belong to one of the elements in the sequence, which can't happen); that union is the upper bound for that chain.  So $A$ has a maximal element which is a proper ideal  containing $J$. 

**Proposition:** (Krull) Every ideal in a ring with unity is contained in a maximal ideal.